<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>At the slight creaking made by Macmaster in pushing open his door, Tietjens started violently. He was sitting in a smoking-jacket, playing patience engrossedly in a sort of garret bedroom. It had a sloping roof outlined by black oak beams, which cut into squares the cream coloured patent distemper of the walls. The room contained also a four-post bedstead, a corner cupboard in black oak, and many rush mats on a polished oak floor of very irregular planking. Tietjens, who hated these disinterred and waxed relics of the past, sat in the centre of the room at a flimsy card-table beneath a white-shaded electric light of a brilliance that, in those surroundings, appeared unreasonable. This was one of those restored old groups of cottages that it was at that date the fashion to convert into hostelries. To it Macmaster, who was in search of the inspiration of the past, had preferred to come. Tietjens, not desiring to interfere with his friend‚Äôs culture, had accepted the quarters, though he would have preferred to go to a comfortable modern hotel as being less affected and cheaper. Accustomed to what he called the grown oldnesses of a morose, rambling Yorkshire manor house, he disliked being among collected and rather pitiful bits which, he said, made him feel ridiculous, as if he were trying to behave seriously at a fancy-dress ball. Macmaster, on the other hand, with gratification and a serious air, would run his fingertips along the bevellings of a darkened piece of furniture, and would declare it genuine ‚ÄúChippendale‚Äù or ‚ÄúJacobean oak,‚Äù as the case might be. And he seemed to gain an added seriousness and weight of manner with each piece of ancient furniture that down the years he thus touched. But Tietjens would declare that you could tell the beastly thing was a fake by just cocking an eye at it and, if the matter happened to fall under the test of professional dealers in old furniture, Tietjens was the more often in the right of it, and Macmaster, sighing slightly, would prepare to proceed still further along the difficult road to connoisseurship. Eventually, by conscientious study, he got so far as at times to be called in by Somerset House to value great properties for probate‚ÅÝ‚Äîan occupation at once distinguished and highly profitable.</p>
			<p>Tietjens swore with the extreme vehemence of a man who has been made, but who much dislikes being seen, to start.</p>
			<p>Macmaster‚ÅÝ‚Äîin evening dress he looked extremely miniature!‚ÅÝ‚Äîsaid:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm sorry, old man, I know how much you dislike being interrupted. But the General is in a terrible temper.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens rose stiffly, lurched over to an eighteenth century rosewood folding washstand, took from its top a glass of flat whisky and soda, and gulped down a large quantity. He looked about uncertainly, perceived a notebook on a ‚ÄúChippendale‚Äù bureau, made a short calculation in pencil and looked at his friend momentarily.</p>
			<p>Macmaster said again:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm sorry, old man. I must have interrupted one of your immense calculations.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou haven‚Äôt. I was only thinking. I‚Äôm just as glad you‚Äôve come. What did you say?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster repeated:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI said, General is in a terrible temper. It‚Äôs just as well you didn‚Äôt come up to dinner.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe isn‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ He isn‚Äôt in a temper. He‚Äôs as pleased as punch at not having to have these women up before him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe says he‚Äôs got the police scouring the whole county for them, and that you‚Äôd better leave by the first train tomorrow.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI won‚Äôt. I can‚Äôt. I‚Äôve got to wait here for a wire from Sylvia.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster groaned:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh dear! Oh dear!‚Äù Then he said hopefully: ‚ÄúBut we could have it forwarded to Hythe.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said with some vehemence:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI tell you I won‚Äôt leave here. I tell you I‚Äôve settled it with the police and that swine of a Cabinet Minister. I‚Äôve mended the leg of the canary of the wife of the police-constable. Sit down and be reasonable. The police don‚Äôt touch people like us.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt believe you realise the public feeling there is‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course I do, amongst people like Sandbach,‚Äù Tietjens said. ‚ÄúSit down, I tell you.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Have some whisky.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù He filled himself out another long tumbler and, holding it, dropped into a too low-seated, reddish wicker armchair that had cretonne fixings. Beneath his weight the chair sagged a good deal and his dress-shirt front bulged up to his chin.</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs the matter with you?‚Äù Tietjens‚Äô eyes were bloodshot.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI tell you,‚Äù Tietjens said, ‚ÄúI‚Äôm waiting for a wire from Sylvia.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh!‚Äù And then: ‚ÄúIt can‚Äôt come tonight, it‚Äôs getting on for one.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt can,‚Äù Tietjens said, ‚ÄúI‚Äôve fixed it up with the postmaster‚ÅÝ‚Äîall the way up to Town! It probably won‚Äôt come because Sylvia won‚Äôt send it until the last moment, to bother me. None the less I‚Äôm waiting for a wire from Sylvia, and this is what I look like.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat woman‚Äôs the cruellest beast‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou might,‚Äù Tietjens interrupted, ‚Äúremember that you‚Äôre talking about my wife.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt see,‚Äù Macmaster said, ‚Äúhow one can talk about Sylvia without‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe line is a perfectly simple one to draw,‚Äù Tietjens said. ‚ÄúYou can relate a lady‚Äôs actions if you know them and are asked to. You mustn‚Äôt comment. In this case you don‚Äôt know the lady‚Äôs actions even, so you may as well hold your tongue.‚Äù He sat looking straight in front of him.</p>
			<p>Macmaster sighed from deep in his chest. He asked himself if this was what sixteen hours waiting had done for his friend, what were all the remaining hours going to do?</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI shall be fit to talk about Sylvia after two more whiskies.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Let‚Äôs settle your other perturbations first.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ The fair girl is called Wannop: Valentine Wannop.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs the Professor‚Äôs name,‚Äù Macmaster said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs the late Professor Wannop‚Äôs daughter,‚Äù Tietjens said. ‚ÄúShe‚Äôs also the daughter of the novelist.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster interjected:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe supported herself for a year after the Professor‚Äôs death as a domestic servant,‚Äù Tietjens said. ‚ÄúNow she‚Äôs housemaid for her mother, the novelist, in an inexpensive cottage. I should imagine the two experiences would make her desire to better the lot of her sex.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster again interjected a ‚ÄúBut‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI got that information from the policeman whilst I was putting his wife‚Äôs canary‚Äôs leg in splints.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe policeman you knocked down?‚Äù His eyes expressed unreasoning surprise. He added: ‚ÄúHe knew Miss‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ eh‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Wannop then!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou would not expect much intelligence from the police of Sussex,‚Äù Tietjens said. ‚ÄúBut you would be wrong. <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.C.</abbr> Finn is clever enough to recognise the young lady who for several years past has managed the constabulary‚Äôs wives‚Äô and children‚Äôs annual tea and sports. He says Miss Wannop holds the quarter-mile, half-mile, high jump, long jump and putting the weight records for East Sussex. That explains how she went over that dyke in such tidy style.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And precious glad the good, simple man was when I told him he was to leave the girl alone. He didn‚Äôt know, he said, how he‚Äôd ever a had the face to serve the warrant on Miss Wannop. The other girl‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe one that squeaked‚ÅÝ‚Äîis a stranger, a Londoner probably.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚Äú<em>You</em> told the policeman‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI gave him,‚Äù Tietjens said, ‚Äúthe <abbr>Rt.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Hon.</abbr>¬ÝStephen Fenick Waterhouse‚Äôs compliments, and he‚Äôd be much obliged if the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.C.</abbr> would hand in a ‚ÄòNo Can Do‚Äô report in the matter of those ladies every morning to his inspector. I gave him also a brand new fi‚Äô pun note‚ÅÝ‚Äîfrom the Cabinet Minister‚ÅÝ‚Äîand a couple of quid and the price of a new pair of trousers from myself. So he‚Äôs the happiest constable in Sussex. A very decent fellow; he told me how to know a dog otter‚Äôs spoor from a gravid bitch‚Äôs.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But that wouldn‚Äôt interest you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He began again:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt look so inexpressibly foolish. I told you I‚Äôd been dining with that swine.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ No, I oughtn‚Äôt to call him a swine after eating his dinner. Besides, he‚Äôs a very decent fellow.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou didn‚Äôt tell me you‚Äôd been dining with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse,‚Äù Macmaster said. ‚ÄúI hope you remembered that, as he‚Äôs amongst other things the President of the Funded Debt Commission he‚Äôs the power of life and death over the department and us.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou didn‚Äôt think,‚Äù Tietjens answered, ‚Äúthat you are the only one to dine with the great ones of the earth! I wanted to talk to that fellow‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ about those figures their cursed crowd made me fake. I meant to give him a bit of my mind.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou <em>didn‚Äôt</em>!‚Äù Macmaster said with an expression of panic. ‚ÄúBesides, they didn‚Äôt ask you to fake the calculation. They only asked you to work it out on the basis of given figures.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnyhow,‚Äù Tietjens said, ‚ÄúI gave him a bit of my mind. I told him that, at threepence, it must run the country‚ÅÝ‚Äîand certainly himself as a politician!‚ÅÝ‚Äîto absolute ruin.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster uttered a deep ‚ÄúGood Lord!‚Äù and then: ‚ÄúBut won‚Äôt you ever remember you‚Äôre a Government servant? He could‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse,‚Äù Tietjens said, ‚Äúasked me if I wouldn‚Äôt consent to be transferred to his secretary‚Äôs department. And when I said: ‚ÄòGo to hell!‚Äô he walked round the streets with me for two hours arguing.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I was working out the chances on a 4¬Ω<abbr>d.</abbr> basis for him when you interrupted me. I‚Äôve promised to let him have the figures when he goes up by the 1:30 on Monday.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou haven‚Äôt.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But by Jove you‚Äôre the only man in England that could do it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat was what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse said,‚Äù Tietjens commented. ‚ÄúHe said old Ingleby had told him so.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI do hope,‚Äù Macmaster said, ‚Äúthat you answered him politely!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI told him,‚Äù Tietjens answered, ‚Äúthat there were a dozen men who could do it as well as I, and I mentioned your name in particular.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut I <em>couldn‚Äôt</em>,‚Äù Macmaster answered. ‚ÄúOf course I could convert a 3<abbr>d.</abbr> rate into 4¬Ω<abbr>d.</abbr> But these are the actuarial variations; they‚Äôre infinite. I couldn‚Äôt touch them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said negligently: ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt want my name mixed up in the unspeakable affair. When I give him the papers on Monday I shall tell him you did most of the work.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Again Macmaster groaned.</p>
			<p>Nor was this distress mere altruism. Immensely ambitious for his brilliant friend, Macmaster‚Äôs ambition was one ingredient of his strong desire for security. At Cambridge he had been perfectly content with a moderate, quite respectable place on the list of mathematical postulants. He knew that that made him safe, and he had still more satisfaction in the thought that it would warrant him in never being brilliant in after life. But when Tietjens, two years after, had come out as a mere Second Wrangler, Macmaster had been bitterly and loudly disappointed. He knew perfectly well that Tietjens simply hadn‚Äôt taken trouble; and, ten chances to one, it was on purpose that Tietjens hadn‚Äôt taken trouble. For the matter of that, for Tietjens it wouldn‚Äôt have been trouble.</p>
			<p>And, indeed, to Macmaster‚Äôs upbraidings, which Macmaster hadn‚Äôt spared him, Tietjens had answered that he hadn‚Äôt been able to think of going through the rest of his life with a beastly placard like Senior Wrangler hung round his neck.</p>
			<p>But Macmaster had early made up his mind that life for him would be safest if he could go about, not very much observed but still an authority, in the midst of a body of men all labelled. He wanted to walk down Pall Mall on the arm, precisely, of a largely-lettered Senior Wrangler; to return eastward on the arm of the youngest Lord Chancellor England had ever seen; to stroll down Whitehall in familiar converse with a world-famous novelist, saluting on the way a majority of My Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. And, after tea, for an hour at the club all these, in a little group, should treat him with the courtesy of men who respected him for his soundness. Then he would be safe.</p>
			<p>And he had no doubt that Tietjens was the most brilliant man in England of that day, so that nothing caused him more anguish than the thought that Tietjens might not make a brilliant and rapid career towards some illustrious position in the public services. He would very willingly‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe desired, indeed, nothing better!‚ÅÝ‚Äîhave seen Tietjens pass over his own head! It did not seem to him a condemnation of the public services that this appeared to be unlikely.</p>
			<p>Yet Macmaster was still not without hope. He was quite aware that there are other techniques of careers than that which he had prescribed for himself. He could not imagine himself, even in the most deferential way, correcting a superior; yet he could see that, though Tietjens treated almost every hierarch as if he were a born fool, no one very much resented it. Of course Tietjens was a Tietjens of Groby; but was that going to be enough to live on forever? Times were changing, and Macmaster imagined this to be a democratic age.</p>
			<p>But Tietjens went on, with both hands as it were, throwing away opportunity and committing outrage.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>That day Macmaster could only consider to be one of disaster. He got up from his chair and filled himself another drink; he felt himself to be distressed and to need it. Slouching amongst his cretonnes, Tietjens was gazing in front of him. He said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHere!‚Äù without looking at Macmaster, and held out his long glass. Into it Macmaster poured whisky with a hesitating hand. Tietjens said: ‚ÄúGo on!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs late; we‚Äôre breakfasting at the Duchemin‚Äôs at ten.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens answered:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt worry, sonny. We‚Äôll be there for your pretty lady.‚Äù He added: ‚ÄúWait another quarter of an hour. I want to talk to you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster sat down again and deliberately began to review the day. It had begun with disaster, and in disaster it had continued.</p>
			<p>And, with something like a bitter irony, Macmaster remembered and brought up now for digestion the parting words of General Campion to himself. The General had limped with him to the hall door up at Mountsby and, standing patting him on the shoulder, tall, slightly bent and very friendly, had said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLook here. Christopher Tietjens is a splendid fellow. But he needs a good woman to look after him. Get him back to Sylvia as quick as you can. Had a little tiff, haven‚Äôt they? Nothing serious? Chrissie hasn‚Äôt been running after the skirts? No? I daresay a little. No? Well then‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster had stood like a gatepost, so appalled. He had stuttered:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo! No!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôve known them both so long,‚Äù the General went on. ‚ÄúLady Claudine in particular. And, believe me, Sylvia is a splendid girl. Straight as a die; the soul of loyalty to her friends. And fearless.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîShe‚Äôd face the devil in his rage. You should have seen her out with the Belvoir! Of course you know her.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Well then!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster had just managed to say that he knew Sylvia, of course.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell then‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù the General had continued‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äúyou‚Äôll agree with me that if there <em>is</em> anything wrong between them he‚Äôs to blame. And it will be resented. Very bitterly. He wouldn‚Äôt set foot in this house again. But he says he‚Äôs going out to her and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSatterthwaite.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI believe‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù Macmaster had begun‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúI believe he is‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell then!‚Äù the General had said: ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs all right.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But Christopher Tietjens needs a good woman‚Äôs backing.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ He‚Äôs a splendid fellow. There are few young fellows for whom I have more‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I could almost say respect.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But he needs that. To ballast him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>In the car, running down the hill from Mountby, Macmaster had exhausted himself in the effort to restrain his execrations of the General. He wanted to shout that he was a pigheaded old fool: a meddlesome ass. But he was in the car with the two secretaries of the Cabinet Minister: the <abbr>Rt.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Hon.</abbr>¬ÝEdward Fenwick Waterhouse, who, being himself an advanced Liberal down for a weekend of golf, preferred not to dine at the house of the Conservative member. At that date there was, in politics, a phase of bitter social feud between the parties: a condition that had not till lately been characteristic of English political life. The prohibition had not extended itself to the two younger men.</p>
			<p>Macmaster was not unpleasurably aware that these two fellows treated him with a certain deference. They had seen Macmaster being talked to familiarly by General Lord Edward Campion. Indeed, they and the car had been kept waiting whilst the General patted their fellow guest on the shoulder; held his upper arm and spoke in a low voice into his ear.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>But that was the only pleasure that Macmaster got out of it.</p>
			<p>Yes, the day had begun disastrously with Sylvia‚Äôs letter; it ended‚ÅÝ‚Äîif it was ended!‚ÅÝ‚Äîalmost more disastrously with the General‚Äôs eulogy of that woman. During the day he had nerved himself to having an immensely disagreeable scene with Tietjens. Tietjens <em>must</em> divorce the woman; it was necessary for the peace of mind of himself, of his friends, of his family; for the sake of his career; in the very name of decency!</p>
			<p>In the meantime Tietjens had rather forced his hand. It had been a most disagreeable affair. They had arrived at Rye in time for lunch‚ÅÝ‚Äîat which Tietjens had consumed the best part of a bottle of Burgundy. During lunch Tietjens had given Macmaster Sylvia‚Äôs letter to read, saying that, as he should later consult his friend, his friend had better be made acquainted with the document.</p>
			<p>The letter had appeared extraordinary in its effrontery, for it said nothing. Beyond the bare statement, ‚ÄúI am now ready to return to you,‚Äù it occupied itself simply with the fact that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝTietjens wanted‚ÅÝ‚Äîcould no longer get on without‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe services of her maid, whom she called Hullo Central. If Tietjens wanted her, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝTietjens, to return to him he was to see that Hullo Central was waiting on the doorstep for her, and so on. She added the detail that there was <em>no one</em> else, underlined, she could bear round her while she was retiring for the night. On reflection Macmaster could see that this was the best letter the woman could have written if she wanted to be taken back; for, had she extended herself into either excuses or explanations, it was ten chances to one Tietjens would have taken the line that he couldn‚Äôt go on living with a woman capable of such a lapse in taste. But Macmaster had never thought of Sylvia as wanting in savoir faire.</p>
			<p>It had none the less hardened him in his determination to urge his friend to divorce. He had intended to begin this campaign in the fly, driving to pay his call on the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin, who, in early life, had been a personal disciple of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRuskin and a patron and acquaintance of the poet-painter, the subject of Macmaster‚Äôs monograph. On this drive Tietjens preferred not to come. He said that he would loaf about the town and meet Macmaster at the golf club towards four-thirty. He was not in the mood for making new acquaintances. Macmaster, who knew the pressure under which his friend must be suffering, thought this reasonable enough, and drove off up Iden Hill by himself.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Few women had ever made so much impression on Macmaster as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin. He knew himself to be in a mood to be impressed by almost any woman, but he considered that that was not enough to account for the very strong influence she at once exercised over him. There had been two young girls in the drawing-room when he had been ushered in, but they had disappeared almost simultaneously, and although he had noticed them immediately afterwards riding past the window on bicycles, he was aware that he would not have recognised them again. From her first words on rising to greet him: ‚ÄúNot <em>the</em> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMacmaster!‚Äù he had had eyes for no one else.</p>
			<p>It was obvious that the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin must be one of those clergymen of considerable wealth and cultured taste who not infrequently adorn the Church of England. The rectory itself, a great, warm-looking manor house of very old red brick, was abutted on to by one of the largest tithe barns that Macmaster had ever seen; the church itself, with a primitive roof of oak shingles, nestled in the corner formed by the ends of rectory and tithe barn, and was by so much the smallest of the three and so undecorated that but for its little belfry it might have been a good cow-byre. All three buildings stood on the very edge of the little row of hills that looks down on the Romney Marsh; they were sheltered from the north wind by a great symmetrical fan of elms and from the southwest by a very tall hedge and shrubbery, all of remarkable yews. It was, in short, an ideal cure of souls for a wealthy clergyman of cultured tastes, for there was not so much as a peasant‚Äôs cottage within a mile of it.</p>
			<p>To Macmaster, in short, this was the ideal English home. Of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin‚Äôs drawing-room itself, contrary to his habit, for he was sensitive and observant in such things, he could afterwards remember little except that it was perfectly sympathetic. Three long windows gave on to a perfect lawn, on which, isolated and grouped, stood standard rose trees, symmetrical half globes of green foliage picked out with flowers like bits of carved pink marble. Beyond the lawn was a low stone wall; beyond that the quiet expanse of the marsh shimmered in the sunlight.</p>
			<p>The furniture of the room was, as to its woodwork, brown, old, with the rich softnesses of much polishing with beeswax. What pictures there were Macmaster recognised at once as being by Simeon Solomon, one of the weaker and more frail aesthetes‚ÅÝ‚Äîaureoled, palish heads of ladies carrying lilies that were not very like lilies. They were in the tradition‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut not the best of the tradition. Macmaster understood‚ÅÝ‚Äîand later <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin confirmed him in the idea‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin kept his more precious specimens of work in a sanctum, leaving to the relatively public room, good-humouredly and with slight contempt, these weaker specimens. That seemed to stamp <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin at once as being of the elect.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin in person was, however, not present; and there seemed to be a good deal of difficulty in arranging a meeting between the two men. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin, his wife said, was much occupied at the weekends. She added, with a faint and rather absent smile, the word, ‚ÄúNaturally.‚Äù Macmaster at once saw that it was natural for a clergyman to be much occupied during the weekends. With a little hesitation <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin suggested that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMacmaster and his friend might come to lunch on the next day‚ÅÝ‚ÄîSaturday. But Macmaster had made an engagement to play the foursome with General Campion‚ÅÝ‚Äîhalf the round from twelve till one-thirty: half the round from three to half-past four. And, as their then present arrangements stood, Macmaster and Tietjens were to take the 6:30 train to Hythe; that ruled out either tea or dinner next day.</p>
			<p>With sufficient, but not too extravagant, regret, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin raised her voice to say:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh dear! Oh dear! But you must see my husband and the pictures after you have come so far.‚Äù</p>
			<p>A rather considerable volume of harsh sound was coming through the end wall of the room‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe barking of dogs, apparently the hurried removal of pieces of furniture or perhaps of packing cases, guttural ejaculations. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin said, with her far away air and deep voice:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey are making a good deal of noise. Let us go into the garden and look at my husband‚Äôs roses, if you‚Äôve a moment more to give us.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster quoted to himself:</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄòI looked and saw your eyes in the shadow of your hair.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>There was no doubt that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin‚Äôs eyes, which were of a dark, pebble blue, were actually in the shadow of her blue-black, very regularly waved hair. The hair came down on the square, low forehead. It was a phenomenon that Macmaster had never before really seen, and, he congratulated himself, this was one more confirmation‚ÅÝ‚Äîif confirmation were needed!‚ÅÝ‚Äîof the powers of observation of the subject of his monograph!</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin bore the sunlight! Her dark complexion was clear; there was, over the cheekbones, a delicate suffusion of light carmine. Her jawbone was singularly clear-cut, to the pointed chin‚ÅÝ‚Äîlike an alabaster, medieval saint‚Äôs.</p>
			<p>She said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course you‚Äôre Scotch. I‚Äôm from Auld Reekie myself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster would have known it. He said he was from the Port of Leith. He could not imagine hiding anything from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin said with renewed insistence:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, but of <em>course</em> you must see my husband and the pictures. Let me see.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ We must think.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Would breakfast now?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said that he and his friend were Government servants and up to rising early. He had a great desire to breakfast in that house. She said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAt a quarter to ten, then, our car will be at the bottom of your street. It‚Äôs a matter of ten minutes only, so you won‚Äôt go hungry long!‚Äù</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She said, gradually gaining animation, that of course Macmaster would bring his friend. He could tell Tietjens that he should meet a very charming girl. She stopped and added suddenly: ‚ÄúProbably, at any rate.‚Äù She said the name which Macmaster caught as ‚ÄúWanstead.‚Äù And possibly another girl. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHorsted, or something like it, her husband‚Äôs junior curate. She said reflectively:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, we might try quite a party‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù and added, ‚Äúquite noisy and gay. I hope your friend‚Äôs talkative!‚Äù Macmaster said something about trouble.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, it can‚Äôt be too much trouble,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúBesides, it might do my husband good.‚Äù She went on: ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin is apt to brood. It‚Äôs perhaps too lonely here.‚Äù And added the rather astonishing words: ‚ÄúAfter all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>And, driving back in the fly, Macmaster said to himself that you couldn‚Äôt call <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin ordinary, at least. Yet meeting her was like going into a room that you had long left and never ceased to love. It felt good. It was perhaps partly her Edinburgh-ness. Macmaster allowed himself to coin that word. There was in Edinburgh a society‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe himself had never been privileged to move in it, but its annals are part of the literature of Scotland!‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhere the ladies are all great ladies in tall drawing-rooms; circumspect yet shrewd: still yet with a sense of the comic: frugal yet warmly hospitable. It was perhaps just Edinburgh-ness that was wanting in the drawing-rooms of his friends in London. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝCressy, the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Hon.</abbr>¬Ý<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLimoux and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDelawnay were all almost perfection in manner, in speech, in composure. But, then, they were not young, they weren‚Äôt Edinburgh‚ÅÝ‚Äîand they weren‚Äôt strikingly elegant!</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin was all three! Her assured, tranquil manner she would retain to any age: it betokened the enigmatic soul of her sex, but, physically, she couldn‚Äôt be more than thirty. That was unimportant, for she would never want to do anything in which physical youth counted. She would never, for instance, have occasion to run: she would always just ‚Äúmove‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîfloatingly! He tried to remember the details of her dress.</p>
			<p>It had certainly been dark blue‚ÅÝ‚Äîand certainly of silk: that rather coarsely-woven, exquisite material that has on its folds as of a silvery shimmer with minute knots. But very dark blue. And it contrived to be at once artistic‚ÅÝ‚Äîabsolutely in the tradition! And yet well cut! Very large sleeves, of course, but still with a certain fit. She had worn an immense necklace of yellow polished amber: on the dark blue! And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin had said, over her husband‚Äôs roses, that the blossoms always reminded her of little mouldings of pink cloud come down for the cooling of the earth.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ A charming thought!</p>
			<p>Suddenly he said to himself:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat a mate for Tietjens!‚Äù And his mind added: ‚ÄúWhy should she not become an Influence!‚Äù</p>
			<p>A vista opened before him, in time! He imagined Tietjens, in some way proprietarily responsible for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin: quite <i xml:lang="fr">pour le bon</i>, tranquilly passionate and accepted, <i xml:lang="fr">motif</i>; and ‚Äúimmensely improved‚Äù by the association. And himself, in a year or two, bringing the at last found Lady of his Delight to sit at the feet of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Lady of his Delight whilst circumspect would be also young and impressionable!‚ÅÝ‚Äîto learn the mysterious assuredness of manner, the gift of dressing, the knack of wearing amber and bending over standard roses‚ÅÝ‚Äîand the Edinburgh-ness!</p>
			<p>Macmaster was thus not a little excited, and finding Tietjens at tea amid the green-stained furnishings and illustrated papers of the large, corrugated iron golf-house, he could not help exclaiming:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve accepted the invitation to breakfast with the Duchemins tomorrow for us both. I hope you won‚Äôt mind,‚Äù although Tietjens was sitting at a little table with General Campion and his brother-in-law, the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Hon.</abbr>¬ÝPaul Sandbach, Conservative member for the division and husband of Lady Claudine. The General said pleasantly to Tietjens:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBreakfast! With Duchemin! You go, my boy! You‚Äôll get the best breakfast you ever had in your life.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He added to his brother-in-law: ‚ÄúNot the eternal mock kedgeree Claudine gives us every morning.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sandbach grunted:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs not for want of trying to steal their cook. Claudine has a shy at it every time we come down here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The General said pleasantly to Macmaster‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe spoke always pleasantly, with a half smile and a slight sibilance:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy brother-in-law isn‚Äôt serious, you understand. My sister wouldn‚Äôt think of stealing a cook. Let alone from Duchemin. She‚Äôd be frightened to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sandbach grunted:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho wouldn‚Äôt?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Both these gentlemen were very lame: <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSandbach from birth and the General as the result of a slight but neglected motor accident. He had practically only one vanity, the belief that he was qualified to act as his own chauffeur, and since he was both inexpert and very careless, he met with frequent accidents. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSandbach had a dark, round, bulldog face and a violent manner. He had twice been suspended from his Parliamentary duties for applying to the then Chancellor of the Exchequer the epithet ‚Äúlying attorney,‚Äù and he was at that moment still suspended.</p>
			<p>Macmaster then became unpleasantly perturbed. With his sensitiveness he was perfectly aware of an unpleasant chill in the air. There was also a stiffness about Tietjens‚Äô eyes. He was looking straight before him; there was a silence too. Behind Tietjens‚Äô back were two men with bright green coats, red knitted waistcoats and florid faces. One was bald and blonde, the other had black hair, remarkably oiled and shiny; both were forty-fivish. They were regarding the occupants of the Tietjens‚Äô table with both their mouths slightly open. They were undisguisedly listening. In front of each were three empty sloe-gin glasses and one half-filled tumbler of brandy and soda. Macmaster understood why the General had explained that his sister had not tried to steal <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDuchemin‚Äôs cook.</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDrink up your tea quickly and let‚Äôs get started.‚Äù He was drawing from his pocket a number of telegraph forms which he began arranging. The General said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt burn your mouth. We can‚Äôt start off before all‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ all these other gentlemen. We‚Äôre too slow.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo; we‚Äôre beastly well stuck,‚Äù Sandbach said.</p>
			<p>Tietjens handed the telegraph forms over to Macmaster.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôd better take a look at these,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI mayn‚Äôt see you again today after the match. You‚Äôre dining up at Mountby. The General will run you up. Lady Claude will excuse me. I‚Äôve got work to do.‚Äù</p>
			<p>This was already matter for dismay for Macmaster. He was aware that Tietjens would have disliked dining up at Mountby with the Sandbachs, who would have a crowd, extremely smart but more than usually unintelligent. Tietjens called this crowd, indeed, the plague-spot of the party‚ÅÝ‚Äîmeaning of Toryism. But Macmaster couldn‚Äôt help thinking that a disagreeable dinner would be better for his friend than brooding in solitude in the black shadows of the huddled town. Then Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm going to have a word with that swine!‚Äù He pointed his square chin rather rigidly before him, and looking past the two brandy drinkers, Macmaster saw one of those faces that frequent caricature made familiar and yet strange. Macmaster couldn‚Äôt, at the moment, put a name to it. It must be a politician, probably a Minister. But which? His mind was already in a dreadful state. In the glimpse he had caught of the telegraph form now in his hand he had perceived that it was addressed to Sylvia Tietjens and began with the word ‚Äúagreed.‚Äù He said swiftly:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHas that been sent or is it only a draft?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat fellow is the <abbr>Rt.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Hon.</abbr>¬ÝStephen Fenwick Waterhouse. He‚Äôs chairman of the Funded Debt Commission. He‚Äôs the swine who made us fake that return in the office.‚Äù</p>
			<p>That moment was the worst Macmaster had ever known. A worse came. Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm going to have a word with him. That‚Äôs why I‚Äôm not dining at Mountby. It‚Äôs a duty to the country.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster‚Äôs mind simply stopped. He was in a space, all windows. There was sunlight outside. And clouds. Pink and white. Woolly! Some ships. And two men: one dark and oily, the other rather blotchy on a blonde baldness. They were talking, but their words made no impression on Macmaster. The dark, oily man said that he was not going to take Gertie to Budapest. Not half! He winked like a nightmare. Beyond were two young men and a preposterous face.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It was all so like a nightmare that the Cabinet Minister‚Äôs features were distorted for Macmaster. Like an enormous mask of pantomime: shiny, with an immense nose and elongated, Chinese eyes.</p>
			<p>Yet not unpleasant! Macmaster was a Whig by conviction, by nation, by temperament. He thought that public servants should abstain from political activity. Nevertheless, he couldn‚Äôt be expected to think a Liberal Cabinet Minister ugly. On the contrary, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse appeared to have a frank, humorous, kindly expression. He listened deferentially to one of his secretaries, resting his hand on the young man‚Äôs shoulder, smiling a little, rather sleepily. No doubt he was overworked. And then, letting himself go in a side-shaking laugh. Putting on flesh!</p>
			<p>What a pity! What a <em>pity</em>! Macmaster was reading a string of incomprehensible words in Tietjens‚Äô heavily scored writing. <i>Not entertain‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ flat not house‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ child remain at sister.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</i> His eyes went backwards and forwards over the phrases. He could not connect the words without stops. The man with the oily hair said in a sickly voice that Gertie was hot stuff, but not the one for Budapest with all the Gitana girls you were telling me of! Why, he‚Äôd kept Gertie for five years now. More like the real thing! His friend‚Äôs voice was like a result of indigestion. Tietjens, Sandbach and the General were stiff, like pokers.</p>
			<p>What a pity! Macmaster thought.</p>
			<p>He ought to have been sitting.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It would have been pleasant and right to be sitting with the pleasant Minister. In the ordinary course he, Macmaster, would have been. The best golfer in the place was usually set to play with distinguished visitors, and there was next to no one in the south of England who ordinarily could beat him. He had begun at four, playing with a miniature cleek and a found shilling ball over the municipal links. Going to the poor school every morning and back to dinner; and back to school and back to bed! Over the cold, rushy, sandy links, beside the grey sea. Both shoes full of sand. The found shilling ball had lasted him three years.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>Macmaster exclaimed: ‚ÄúGood God!‚Äù He had just gathered from the telegram that Tietjens meant to go to Germany on Tuesday. As if at Macmaster‚Äôs ejaculation Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes. It <em>is</em> unbearable. If you don‚Äôt stop those swine, General, I shall.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The General sibilated low, between his teeth:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWait a minute.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Wait a minute.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Perhaps that other fellow will.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The man with the black oily hair said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf Budapest‚Äôs the place for the girls you say it is, old pal, with the Turkish baths and all, we‚Äôll paint the old town red all right, next month,‚Äù and he winked at Tietjens. His friend, with his head down, seemed to make internal rumblings, looking apprehensively beneath his blotched forehead at the General.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot,‚Äù the other continued argumentatively, ‚Äúthat I don‚Äôt love my old woman. She‚Äôs all right. And then there‚Äôs Gertie. ‚ÄôOt stuff, but the real thing. But I say a man wants‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù He ejaculated, ‚ÄúOh!‚Äù</p>
			<p>The General, his hands in his pockets, very tall, thin, red-cheeked, his white hair combed forward in a fringe, sauntered towards the other table. It was not two yards, but it seemed a long saunter. He stood right over them, they looking up, open-eyed, like schoolboys at a balloon. He said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm glad you‚Äôre enjoying our links, gentlemen.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The bald man said: ‚ÄúWe are! We are! First-class. A treat!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut,‚Äù the General said, ‚Äúit isn‚Äôt wise to discuss one‚Äôs‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ eh‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ domestic circumstances‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ at‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ at mess, you know, or in a golf house. People might hear.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The gentleman with the oily hair rose and exclaimed:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOo, the‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>The other man mumbled: ‚ÄúShut up, Briggs.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The General said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm the president of the club, you know. It‚Äôs my duty to see that the <em>majority</em> of the club and its visitors are pleased. I hope you don‚Äôt mind.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The General came back to his seat. He was trembling with vexation.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt makes one as beastly a bounder as themselves,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúBut what the devil else was one to do?‚Äù The two city men had ambled hastily into the dressing-rooms; the dire silence fell. Macmaster realised that, for these Tories at least, this was really the end of the world. The last of England! He returned, with panic in his heart, to Tietjens‚Äô telegram.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Tietjens was going to Germany on Tuesday. He offered to throw over the department.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ These were unthinkable things. You couldn‚Äôt imagine them!</p>
			<p>He began to read the telegram all over again. A shadow fell upon the flimsy sheets. The <abbr>Rt.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Hon.</abbr>¬Ý<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse was between the head of the table and the windows. He said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôre much obliged, General. It was impossible to hear ourselves speak for those obscene fellows‚Äô smut. It‚Äôs fellows like that that make our friends the suffragettes! That warrants them.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù He added: ‚ÄúHullo! Sandbach! Enjoying your rest?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The General said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI was hoping you‚Äôd take on the job of telling these fellows off.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSandbach, his bulldog jaw sticking out, the short black hair on his scalp appearing to rise, barked:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHullo, Waterslop! Enjoying your plunder?‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse, tall, slouching and untidy-haired, lifted the flaps of his coat. It was so ragged that it appeared as if straws stuck out of the elbows.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll that the suffragettes have left of me,‚Äù he said, laughingly. ‚ÄúIsn‚Äôt one of you fellows a genius called Tietjens?‚Äù He was looking at Macmaster. The General said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTietjens‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Macmaster‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù The Minister went on very friendly:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, it‚Äôs you?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I just wanted to take the opportunity of thanking you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood God! What for?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<em>You</em> know!‚Äù the Minister said, ‚Äúwe couldn‚Äôt have got the Bill before the House till next session without your figures‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù He said slyly: ‚ÄúCould we, Sandbach?‚Äù and added to Tietjens: ‚ÄúIngleby told me‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens was chalk-white and stiffened. He stuttered:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can‚Äôt take any credit.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I consider‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster exclaimed:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTietjens‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù he didn‚Äôt know what he was going to say.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, you‚Äôre too modest,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse overwhelmed Tietjens. ‚ÄúWe know whom we‚Äôve to thank‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù His eyes drifted to Sandbach a little absently. Then his face lit up.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh! Look here, Sandbach,‚Äù he said‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúCome here, will you?‚Äù He walked a pace or two away, calling to one of his young men: ‚ÄúOh, Sanderson, give the bobbie a drink. A good stiff one.‚Äù Sandbach jerked himself awkwardly out of his chair and limped to the Minister.</p>
			<p>Tietjens burst out:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMe too modest! <em>Me!</em>‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ The swine.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ The unspeakable swine!‚Äù</p>
			<p>The General said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs it all about, Chrissie? You probably are too modest.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDamn it. It‚Äôs a serious matter. It‚Äôs driving me out of the unspeakable office I‚Äôm in.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Macmaster said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo! No! You‚Äôre wrong. It‚Äôs a wrong view you take.‚Äù And with a good deal of real passion he began to explain to the General. It was an affair that had already given him a great deal of pain. The Government had asked the statistical department for figures illuminating a number of schedules that they desired to use in presenting their new Bill to the Commons. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse was to present it.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝWaterhouse at the moment was slapping <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSandbach on the back, tossing the hair out of his eyes and laughing like a hysterical schoolgirl. He looked suddenly tired. A police constable, his buttons shining, appeared, drinking from a pewter-pot outside the glazed door. The two city men ran across the angle from the dressing-room to the same door, buttoning their clothes. The Minister said loudly:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMake it guineas!‚Äù</p>
			<p>It seemed to Macmaster painfully wrong that Tietjens should call anyone so genial and unaffected an unspeakable swine. It was unjust. He went on with his explanation to the General.</p>
			<p>The Government had wanted a set of figures based on a calculation called B 7. Tietjens, who had been working on one called H 19‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor his own instruction‚ÅÝ‚Äîhad persuaded himself that H 19 was the lowest figure that was actuarially sound.</p>
			<p>The General said pleasantly: ‚ÄúAll this is Greek to me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh no, it needn‚Äôt be,‚Äù Macmaster heard himself say. ‚ÄúIt amounts to this. Chrissie was asked by the Government‚ÅÝ‚Äîby Sir Reginald Ingleby‚ÅÝ‚Äîto work out what 3 ‚úï 3 comes to: it was that sort of thing in principle. He said that the only figure that would not ruin the country was nine times nine‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe Government wanted to shovel money into the workingman‚Äôs pockets, in fact,‚Äù the General said. ‚ÄúMoney for nothing‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ or votes, I suppose.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut that isn‚Äôt the point, sir,‚Äù Macmaster ventured to say. ‚ÄúAll that Chrissie was asked to do was to say what 3 ‚úï 3 was.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, he appears to have done it and earned no end of kudos,‚Äù the General said. ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs all right. We‚Äôve all, always, believed in Chrissie‚Äôs ability. But he‚Äôs a strong-tempered beggar.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe was extraordinarily rude to Sir Reginald over it,‚Äù Macmaster went on.</p>
			<p>The General said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh dear! Oh dear!‚Äù He shook his head at Tietjens and assumed with care the blank, slightly disappointing air of the regular officer. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt like to hear of rudeness to a superior. In <em>any</em> service.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think,‚Äù Tietjens said with extreme mildness, ‚Äúthat Macmaster is quite fair to me. Of course he‚Äôs a right to his opinion as to what the discipline of a service demands. I certainly told Ingleby that I‚Äôd rather resign than do that beastly job‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou shouldn‚Äôt have,‚Äù the General said. ‚ÄúWhat would become of the services if everyone did as you did?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sandbach came back laughing and dropped painfully into his low armchair.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat fellow‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù he began.</p>
			<p>The General slightly raised his hand.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA minute!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI was about to tell Chrissie, here, that if I am offered the job‚ÅÝ‚Äîof course it‚Äôs an order really‚ÅÝ‚Äîof suppressing the Ulster Volunteers‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I‚Äôd rather cut my throat than do it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sandbach said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course you would, old chap. They‚Äôre our brothers. You‚Äôd see the beastly, lying Government damned first.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI was going to say that I should accept,‚Äù the General said, ‚ÄúI shouldn‚Äôt resign my commission.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sandbach said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood <em>God</em>!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I didn‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGeneral! You! After all Claudine and I have said‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Tietjens interrupted:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúExcuse me, Sandbach. I‚Äôm receiving this reprimand for the moment. I wasn‚Äôt, then, rude to Ingleby. If I‚Äôd expressed contempt for what he said or for himself, that would have been rude. I didn‚Äôt. He wasn‚Äôt in the least offended. He looked like a cockatoo, but he wasn‚Äôt offended. And I let him over-persuade me. He was right, really. He pointed out that, if I didn‚Äôt do the job, those swine would put on one of our little competition wallah head clerks and get all the schedules faked, as well as starting off with false premises!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs the view I take,‚Äù the General said, ‚Äúif I don‚Äôt take the Ulster job the Government will put on a fellow who‚Äôll burn all the farmhouses and rape all the women in the three counties. They‚Äôve got him up their sleeve. He only asks for the Connaught Rangers to go through the north with. And you know what <em>that</em> means. All the same‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù He looked at Tietjens: ‚ÄúOne should not be rude to one‚Äôs superiors.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI tell you I wasn‚Äôt rude,‚Äù Tietjens exclaimed. ‚ÄúDamn your nice, paternal old eyes. Get that into your mind!‚Äù</p>
			<p>The General shook his head:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou brilliant fellows!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúThe country, or the army, or anything, could not be run by you. It takes stupid fools like me and Sandbach, along with sound, moderate heads like our friend here.‚Äù He indicated Macmaster and, rising, went on: ‚ÄúCome along. You‚Äôre playing me, Macmaster. They say you‚Äôre hot stuff. Chrissie‚Äôs no good. He can take Sandbach on.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He walked off with Macmaster towards the dressing-room.</p>
			<p>Sandbach, wriggling awkwardly out of his chair, shouted:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSave the country.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Damn it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù He stood on his feet. ‚ÄúI and Campion.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Look at what the country‚Äôs come to.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ What with swine like these two in our club houses! And policemen to go round the links with Ministers to protect them from the wild women.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ By God! I‚Äôd like to have the flaying of the skin off some of their backs. I would. By God I would.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He added:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat fellow Waterslops is a bit of a sportsman. I haven‚Äôt been able to tell you about our bet, you‚Äôve been making such a noise.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Is your friend really plus one at North Berwick? What are you like?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMacmaster is a good plus two anywhere when he‚Äôs in practice.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sandbach said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood Lord.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ A stout fellow‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAs for me,‚Äù Tietjens said, ‚ÄúI loathe the beastly game.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo do I,‚Äù Sandbach answered. ‚ÄúWe‚Äôll just lollop along behind them.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
